All right first want to consider the case where we're charging a capacitor and we're charging a capacitor
we mean that we have a capacitor that's connected to an IMF.
And in this case we also have a resistor R and I've also included a switch here and at initially the
switch is open.
So if the switch is open basically the resistance of just this part here is infinity.
Therefore there is no current here until I close the switch.
One other comment here initially the charge on the capacitor which I called Q zero right when the switch
is open.
The capacitor is initially uncharged which means it has zero charge on it here.
In addition if the charge is zero remember our fundamental capacitor equation that relates to the charge
on the plates to the voltage on the plates.
So if the charge is initially zero the only way you can have this is if the voltage between the plates
is zero.
OK.
So that means the initial voltage across the plates has to be zero.
OK so let's go ahead now and close the switch so that T goes to zero we close the switch and let's see
what happens though.
I'm going to do is I'm just going to draw a line here just to represent a closed switch.
Once you close the switch now again there is an electric current just like before that electric current
again goes from.
We're talking about the positive electric current.
It's a current I.
That goes like this.
You can imagine if you're an electron anywhere on this segment over here if you're an electron on this
segment where do you want to go you want to head right toward the positive terminal of that battery.
If you're an electron anywhere on this side you want to head farther away from this negative terminal.
So you'd be an electron you'd want to move in this direction which means there is a positive current
initially here.
Flowing like this.
Now that current is not constant that is the key point here.
But there will be a current when you first close the switch.
Now in order to look at this we're going to apply our Kirchoff's voltage law.
What I'm going to do here is I'm going to pick a point.
Let's start over here and let's look at all the voltages.
Let's do a complete loop.
We're going to add all the voltages and see what happens.
And again we said that electrons are going to move away.
If you're on this branch and electrons are going to move onto this plate.
So that means that at some specific time there may be some net negative charge on here and whenever
net negative charge I have on this plate I'm going to have a net positive charge because electrons are
going to move away from this plate.
That charge is always equal and opposite is given by some value.
Q Okay.
Let's go ahead and apply Kirchoff's voltage law.
I'm going to go around here in a clockwise fashion the first thing I encounter is an email.
So I have to add the voltage of that MF.
Now if there is initially a current flowing over here from left to right flowing through the resistor
and I'm going in this direction that means that this point is at a higher electrical potential and that
one that means I'm going to get a voltage drop and the magnitude of that voltage drop is given by Ohm's
law.
OK.
And now I'm also going to get a look at.
I've got a little bit of positive charge on here.
I've got some negative charge on the other plate.
So if I cross I go from a higher electrical potential toward a lower electrical potential and the voltage
drop across the capacitor we're just going to call it visi.
And now I go back to where I started.
It's equal to zero.
Let's call this equation 1.
So this is an important equation.
Now what I'm going to do now is I'm going to use my capacitor equation again the voltage on the capacitor
is related to the charge on the capacitor.
So what I'm going to do now is I'm going to isolate the C and I'm going to substitute v c for the value
in my Kirchoff's voltage law.
So let's go ahead and take one one extra step here.
So I still have the voltage of the battery.
I still have the current I a voltage drop across that resistance and now instead of writing v c I'm
simply going to multiply or subtract here.
The charge on the capacitor divided by the value of the capacitance that's is equivalent to the voltage
across the capacitor.
And this is equal to zero.
So now let's go ahead and solve for the current.
So to get for the current Well what you have to do is you simply bring this term on the other side and
you divide through by the resistance.
So you're going to be left with something like this you're going to be left with the IMF divided by
the resistance and then you're going to be left with an another term which is the charge on the plates
divided by this term.
Here are times c.
So this here is an important equation over here.
Now remember what just happened at time equals zero.
What did I say.
I said that a time equals zero.
There is no charge on the plates.
So that means that this term here initially is equal to zero because it was initially uncharged.
So that means that this whole second term here vanishes at time equals to zero when you first close
the switch.
So when you first close the switch the current that you get is equal to the IMF divided by the resistance
this is at Teagle Zero kind of.
Just after closing the switch.
OK so this is an important relationship here.
Go ahead.
Put that in a box.
Actually if you look at this current over here what is that current look like.
This is the exact same current you would get as if there is no capacitor there.
Right.
If there was no capacitor here and you applied Ohm's a lot the circuit Well you'd only have a single
resistance with an MF and you would get this current.
Now the difference if there is no capacitor is that this current here would be the steady state current.
However in this case it's only the instantaneous current that you get immediately after closing the
switch.
Now what's going to happen now.
Well that current You're going to keep on building up charge putting more and more positive charge on
this plate and then putting more and more negative charges on this plate.
And eventually the voltage here of this capacitor starts getting big.
And if you look at now if you compare the electric field produced in the wire there's two sources of
electric fields in the wire.
There is the electric field produced by the battery that's pointing in one direction but now you're
going to start building up a second electric field in the wire produced by the charges on these parallel
plates.
Eventually those are going to cancel out and the current is going to drop to zero.
So here's what it looks like at least qualitatively.
Let's go ahead and make a plot of the current as a function of time
and just make a sketch.
So we know that at time zero this is what we get when we get some value up here and this value is the
IMF the battery divided by the radius divided by the resistance.
Now after a long period time I told you you're going to start building up some charges and eventually
the voltage across the capacitor is going to be equal to the IMF.
And at that time the current will go to zero.
And the way it looks like kind of in between both of those times is it looks like an exponentially decaying
current.
So now what we're going to do is we're going to look at the mathematics involved in calculating the
current as a function of time.
We're also going to look at the charge build up as a function of time and also the voltage difference
across the plates here is a function of time.